{\rtf1\ansi \deff0\deflang1024{\fonttbl{\f0\froman Times New Roman;}{\f1\froman Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss Arial;}{\f3\froman Times New Roman;}{\f4\froman Roman PS;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;
\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\s228\fi-1138\li3413\ri850\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon229\snext0 toc 5;}{\s229\fi-1138\li3413\ri850\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\sbasedon230\snext0 toc 4;}{\s230\fi-1138\li3413\ri850\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon231\snext230 toc 3;}{\s231\fi-1138\li2275\ri850\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon0\snext0 toc 2;}{
\s232\fi-1134\li1134\ri851\sb60\sa60\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon0\snext0 toc 1;}{\s242\sb120\sa120\tqc\tx4514\tqr\tx9029 \f3\fs20\lang2057 \sbasedon243\snext242 footer;}{\s243\sb120\sa120\tqr\tx9029 \f3\fs20\lang2057 
\sbasedon0\snext243 header;}{\s250\fi-1134\li1134\sb120\sa240\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon255\snext255 heading 5;}{\s251\fi-1134\li1134\sb120\sa240\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon250\snext255 heading 4;}{\s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn 
\f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon251\snext255 heading 3;}{\s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon252\snext255 heading 2;}{\s254\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs28\lang2057 \sbasedon253\snext255 heading 1;}{
\s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon0\snext255 Normal Indent;}{\qj\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\qc\sb120\sa120 \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon0\snext255 caption;}{\s2\qj\fi-1134\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\sbasedon255\snext2 Numbered Parargaph;}{\s3\qj\li1134\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \sbasedon255\snext3 List;}{\s4\qc\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa240\keepn \b\f3\fs32\lang2057 \sbasedon254\snext4 Title;}{\s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\sbasedon255\snext5 List nospace;}}{\info{\author Graham John}{\operator Graham John}{\creatim\yr1995\mo2\dy20\hr10\min6}{\revtim\yr1995\mo2\dy27\hr10\min19}{\printim\yr1995\mo2\dy27\hr9\min14}{\version31}{\edmins1449}{\nofpages14}{\nofwords5110}
{\nofchars30959}{\vern16433}}\paperw11894\paperh16834\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440\gutter0 \widowctrl\ftnbj\hyphhotz0\makebackup\margmirror \sectd \binfsxn7\binsxn7\linex0\headery706\footery706\colsx709\endnhere {\header \pard\plain 
\s243\sb120\sa120\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 \tqr\tx9029 \f3\fs20\lang2057 Single Method Composer - User Documentation\tab February 1995
\par }{\footer \pard\plain \s242\sb120\sa120\brdrt\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 \tqc\tx4514\tqr\tx9029 \f3\fs20\lang2057 {\field{\*\fldinst filename }{\fldrslt SMCUSER.DOC}}\tab {\field{\*\fldinst page }{\fldrslt 14}}\tab Printed:  {\field{\*\fldinst date }{\fldrslt 
27/02/95}}  {\field{\*\fldinst time }{\fldrslt 09:14}}
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qc\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa240\keepn \b\f3\fs32\lang2057 
\par 
\par 
\par SMC
\par Single Method Composer
\par Version 1.1
\par User Documentation
\par \pard \s4\qr\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa240\keepn 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \pard \s4\qr\fi-1138\li1138\sb120\sa120\keepn {\fs26 Graham A C John
\par }{\fs26 February 1995
\par }\pard\plain \qj\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 \page {\b\fs28 Table of Conten}{\b\fs28 ts}{\b\f4\fs32 
\par }
\par \pard\plain \s232\fi-1134\li1134\ri851\sb60\sa60\tx1494\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field{\*\fldinst toc \\o}{\fldrslt 1.\tab Introduction\tab 3
\par 2.\tab System Requirements\tab 4
\par 3.\tab SMC Functions\tab 4
\par \pard\plain \s231\fi-1138\li2275\ri850\tx2815\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 3.1.\tab Help (F1)\tab 4
\par 3.2.\tab Select Method (F2)\tab 4
\par 3.3.\tab Define Exclusions (F3)\tab 4
\par \pard\plain \s230\fi-1138\li3413\ri850\tx4133\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 3.3.1.\tab Lengths Below/Above\tab 5
\par 3.3.2.\tab Longest yet\tab 5
\par 3.3.3.\tab Optimisation\tab 5
\par 3.3.4.\tab Tenors split course heads\tab 6
\par 3.3.5.\tab Reverse\~\tab 6
\par 3.3.6.\tab Rotation\tab 6
\par 3.3.7.\tab Rounds @ Hand, Bank, Int, LH\tab 6
\par 3.3.8.\tab 87s @ Back, 82s, 83s\tab 7
\par 3.3.9.\tab Number of Parts (1,2,3,4,5,6,7,10,12)\tab 7
\par 3.3.10.\tab Plains/Bobs/Singles\tab 7
\par 3.3.11.\tab Minimum Musical Rows\tab 7
\par \pard\plain \s231\fi-1138\li2275\ri850\tx2815\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 3.4.\tab Define Inclusions (Alt F3)\tab 8
\par 3.5.\tab Build Composing Table (F4)\tab 9
\par 3.6.\tab Display Composition List (F5)\tab 10
\par 3.7.\tab Display Composition from List (Enter)\tab 11
\par 3.8.\tab Display Composition in Progress (F6)\tab 12
\par 3.9.\tab Display Music Analysis (F7)\tab 12
\par 3.10.\tab Display Composing Table (F8)\tab 12
\par 3.11.\tab Suspend/Restart Composition (F9)\tab 13
\par 3.12.\tab Quit (F10)\tab 14
\par \pard\plain \s232\fi-1134\li1134\ri851\sb60\sa60\tx1494\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 4.\tab Feedback\~\~\tab 14
\par \pard \s232\fi-1134\li1134\ri851\sb60\sa60\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 }}\pard\plain \s232\fi-1134\li1134\ri851\sb60\sa60\tldot\tx8646\tqr\tx9072 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\par \pard\plain \s254\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs28\lang2057 \page {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Introduction
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Single Method Composer (SMC) has been developed to carry out exhaustive searches for compositions of treble-hunting Major methods. It can search f
or short touches, quarterpeal compositions, peal compositions, or even extents.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
The program is written entirely in 80386 assembler and has been designed to achieve the highest possible composing speed. With the Pentium microprocessors currently available it can generate and check over half a million leads per second. Even at this spe
ed many searches are still too long to exhaust. Consequently a number of different types of selection criteria can be specified to restrict the search. Some of these criteria c
an be used to optimise the composing table, some to optimise the composing process, and some to evaluate the compositions found. The earlier the selection criteria can be applied the more effectively the search can be contained.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
One of the benefits of using this brute force approach to composition is that if an exhaustive search can be completed, it is possible to assess what is the best available composition for the specified criteria. Comparison with existing collections can al
so show where an interesting composition has been missed using traditional methods.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
SMC comes into its own when used for methods with a high incidence of falseness. To find compositions for such methods by hand is slower than for methods with little incidence of falseness; but for SMC the greater the falseness, the faster the search can 
be completed. This is because the falseness chops off huge branches of the search tree and this outweighs the additional time required to check the higher number of false lead heads.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 For many method
s, huge numbers of compositions exist. The job of the composer is then one of selecting those which have some different, improved or special quality over those previously produced. SMC provides a summary of musical rows and scores compositions found to as
sist this process.   
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
Some insight into method structure, incidence of falseness and composing techniques will help to decide how best to restrict a particular search. However, some exploratory searches using different criteria can often indicate what migh
t work. For example, if too many compositions are being found, the search criteria can be tightened. Conversely, if no compositions are being found then the criteria can be relaxed. Furthermore, there is an option to exclude tenors split course heads, whi
ch is very effective in finding alternative course structures.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 I don't mind users of SMC claiming authorship of any new compositions discovered  (provided that someone else hasn't found and submitted them for publication first), but if you intend to publis
h in the Ringing World, please be careful not to waste the Peal Compositions Committee's time by:
\par \pard\plain \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab using an independent peal proving program to confirm it is true 
\par \pard \s3\qj\fi-306\li1440\sa120 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab being as sure as you can that it, or something very similar, has not been published before
\par {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab comparing it with published compositions to ensure that it has a distinction making it worthy of publication
\par \pard \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab pointing out why you think the composition has merit
\par {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab not submitting lots of variants of a composition
\par \pard\plain \s254\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs28\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab System Requirements
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
SMC is an MS-DOS program which requires a PC with an 80386 or better processor and at least 584K (600,000 bytes) of conventional memory available to execute it. It displays 80x25 text, so there are no special display requirements.
\par If it is difficult to make sufficient memory available under your normal configuration, create a bootable diskette for SMC where DOS and the essential drivers are loaded in high memory.
\par SMC can also be run under Windows if the conventional memory requirement can be met. This has the big advantage that it can be left running in the background for long periods without tying up the PC.
\par The program can be run by executing SMC.EXE and no data files are required. To run under Windows, a program information file (SMC.PIF) and Windows Icon (SMC.ICO) are also provided, but are not essential.
\par \pard\plain \s254\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs28\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab SMC Functions
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 All 
SMC functions can be invoked at any time, regardless of the function last invoked. No confirmation (are you sure?) messages are issued by SMC, so care should be taken to ensure the correct function key is pressed.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The functions are described individually in the following sub-sections.
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Help (F1)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Displays a summary of available functions and keys.
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Select Method (F2)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Pressing F2 rotates through the available methods.
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Define Exclusions (F3)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 For consistency all
 fields entered on this screen are treated as exclusions. Option fields should be marked with 'X' to exclude the option or blank to include it (e.g. Optimisation: X will turn off optimisation). The remaining fields hold a number which is either a minimum 
or a maximum value.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
Exclusions may be changed while composition is in progress. However, the composing table will not be optimised for the new criteria until it is rebuilt (F4). Furthermore, compositions currently listed will not necessarily satisfy the new criteria.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The following editing keys are available:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 X, x\tab \tab Mark as excluded
\par 0-9   \tab \tab Numbers for maximum and minimum values
\par Space\tab \tab Remove exclusions, clear values to zero
\par Left\tab \tab Move cursor left through or between input fields
\par Right\tab \tab Move cursor right through or between input fields
\par Up\tab \tab \tab Move up through the input fields
\par Down\tab \tab Move down through the input fields
\par Tab\tab \tab Move to next field
\par Backtab\tab \tab Move to previous field
\par Home\tab \tab Move to first field
\par End\tab \tab Move to last field
\par Enter\tab \tab Accept and edit field input, move to next input field
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 The individual exclusion fields are described in the following subsections:
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Lengths Below/Above
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
These input fields are used to define the minimum and maximum length of the compositions required. The default is 5000 to 5376. Keep these values in a reasonably tight range to minimise search time.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Longest yet
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 This option is useful when attempting a search where you are not sure whether a composition of the desired length will exist. SMC will progr
essively add the longest composition yet found to the composition list, even though the minimum length criteria has not been satisfied. These short compositions are given a score of their length, which puts the longest at the top of the list but relegates
 them all to the bottom of the list as soon as compositions of the correct length are found.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Optimisation
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 If set to blank, the search will be optimised. Currently, only {\i regenerative optimisation} is implemented. Whenever the composition runs
 false, the composing engine backtracks and substitutes a call at the previous calling position. As it composes forwards again, it copies the pattern of calls from the start of the composition.
\par The following simple example demonstrates how a 672 of Plain Bob Major would be found. In the example a new line indicates that the composition runs false or comes round early. Each letter corresponds to a Plain, Bobbed or Singled lead and new leads gener
ated without backtracking are underlined.
\par \pard\plain \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Without optimisation:
\par \pard \s3\qj\li1138 PPPPPPP
\par PPPPPP{\ul BPPPPPPP}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul BPPPPPPP}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul B}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul SPPPPPPP}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPPSPPPPPP{\ul BPPPPPPP}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPPSPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul BPPPPPPP}
\par PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPPSPPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul B}
\par \pard \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPPSPPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul S}
\par With regenerative optimisation:
\par \pard \s3\qj\li1138 PPPPPPP
\par PPPPPP{\ul BPPPPPPBPPPPPPB}
\par \pard \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 PPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPP{\ul SPPPPPPBPPPPPPBPPPPPPS}
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Without optimisation the composing engine has to backtrack eight times; with optimisation only twice. As demonstrated by this exa
mple, all multipart compositions are found  immediately after the first part has been found, without further backtracking. Furthermore, regenerative optimisation causes the search to accelerate dramatically as soon as the composing engine has backtracked 
as far as the first course.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 If some calling positions are excluded (e.g. for tenors together), regeneration following backtracking is deferred to the end of following course. This prevents calls being regenerated which don\rquote 
t satisfy the exclusion criteria. 
\par The only compositions missed by regenerative optimisation are rotations. Therefore, the optimisation and rotation options should be used in combination to ensure that all compositions are found.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Tenors split course heads
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
This option can be used to find tenors together compositions which use structures such as I/V, 4/I, I/O/V/V and S3/S5 which work for the method concerned. It works by marking the tenors split course heads as excluded in the composing table. When the table
 is built, any l
eads which cannot be reached due to the course head exclusions are themselves excluded. Only the required course structures then remain. The Display Composing Table (F8) function can be used to see the effect this option has on the leads and calls availab
le.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
Although little in the way of call exclusions should be applied for this option to work well, it is sometimes a good idea to exclude calls where the tenor makes fourths. This prevents SMC generating long courses where the tenor rolls round on the front
, repeatedly making fourths, yet still returning to the seventh at the course end.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Reverse\~ 
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
This option controls the direction of the composing engine. The default is excluded; this means that the composing engine will start with all leads set to Plain. When the composition runs false, the plain will first be changed to a bob and then a single, 
subject to call exclusions. If not excluded, the reverse happens i.e. the composing engine starts with all calls set to single and change these to 
bobs and then plains. Reversing composition will find the compositions containing the highest number of singles/bobs first.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The composing table must be re-built after changing this option.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Rotation  
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
This option will take each composition found by the composing engine and rotate it by course heads. Each rotation is then evaluated to score it and check it meets the exclusion criteria. Using this option ensures that the most musical rotation is found qu
ickly. It should also be used with the optimisation option to ensure that all compositions are found.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Rounds @ Hand, Bank, Int, LH
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
Rounds exclusions can be used to find compositions only coming round at handstroke by excluding Rounds @ Back, or internally within the lead by excluding Rounds @ LH (lead head). Conversely, if only conventional finishes are required, mark Rounds @ Int (i
nternal) as excluded.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 If, for example, you require all the quarterpeals coming round at backstroke snap, exclude Rounds @ LH with a minimum length of 1250 and a maximum length of (say) 1442.  
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab 87s @ Back, 82s, 83s
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 These options allow you exclude less musical leads such as those which contain 87s at backstroke, or 82s/83s at either stroke.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Number of Parts (1,2,3,4,5,6,7,10,12)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
These options allow you to search for multiparts only (by excluding one parts), or search for compositions with a specified number of parts. If the optimisation option is selected and one parts are excluded, the composing engine will further opti
mise the search. When the composition runs false, backtracking is forced until a change of calling within the first part occurs, since regenerative optimisation ensures that multiparts are found from the first part without running false. For this purpose,
 the size of the first part is determined as maximum length divided by minimum part size. Restricting the search to say three parts and above can very substantially reduce the search time.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 When searching for multiparts where the part heads are not course h
eads (e.g. seven parts), individual calling positions should not be excluded when regenerative optimisation is required, otherwise some multipart compositions may be missed. 
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Plains/Bobs/Singles
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
These options give the ability to restrict the search to compositions containing specific numbers of  plains, bobs and singles both in total and in each calling position. The calling position columns relate to the position of the tenor at backstroke after
 the call has been made e.g. 8ths is Home, 7ths is Wrong and 3rds is Before (at a bob).
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
Set the maximum (Plains/Bobs/Singles Above) to zero if no calls are required in a calling position, since this helps optimisation of the composing table. Always use above zero and below 9999 if you do not require a specific number of calls, since SMC will
 not waste time counting calls if there are no maxima or minima. Setting the Any/Above option to zero will exclude that type of call completely.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 If call maxima are set to anything other than 9999, the composing e
ngine will count the number of calls in each calling position (and in total) while composing. If any are exceeded, it will backtrack. Compositions not achieving a specified minimum number of calls are discarded after the composing engine has found them.

\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 These options allow searches for compositions of a particular type, such as tenors together with only one Before, or compositions only containing singles at Home.
\par \pard\plain \s252\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Minimum Musical Rows
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 These minimum criteria are checked for each composition 
found by the composing engine. If the composition (or any rotations of it) does not satisfy the criteria it will be discarded. Although these exclusions allow filtering of the compositions to be viewed, they have a relatively small effect on composing per
formance.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
The musical rows provided are mostly four bell masks, and the minimum can be specified for the back and front (i.e. back/front) of the row. Apart from crus (combination roll ups - xx78, where xx is any combination of 4,5 &6), where up to 144 can 
be specified and 5678cmb (combinations of 5,6,7 & 8)  where up to 576 can be specified, all other values can be set from 0 to 24.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Eight individual rows can also be specified as mandatory in compositions by setting the minimum value to 1. These are:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 13572468  Q(ueens)
\par 12753468  W(hittingtons) 
\par 15263748  T(ittums)
\par 87654321  B(ack Rounds)
\par 12563478  H(agdyke)
\par 14327658  R(ollercoaster)
\par 65432178  6  
\par 76543218  7
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Define Inclusions (Alt F3)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Pressing Alt F3 brings up a screen which allows c
ourse heads to be selected by wild card (i.e. the character "?"). If the course head is followed by "+", "-" or blank then only in course, out of course or both course heads will be included, respectively. For example, to select the 24 course heads of Sim
on Humphrey's Lincolnshire, use the following:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 1?3???78+
\par 1??3??78-
\par 
\par \pard \s5\qj\li1134 If calls are restricted by exclusion to middles, wrongs and homes, SMC will very quickly find all the possible arrangements of these 24 courses. 
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Inclusion (Alt F3) takes effect before
 exclusion (F3) and controls the building of the composing table. Any matching course heads are marked for inclusion and the remainder are excluded. It is important to recognise that specifying courses for inclusion does not guarantee that they will be in
cluded, since exclusion criteria take precedence over inclusion criteria. Furthermore, any leads which cannot be reached (due to call restrictions or exclusion of intermediate leads) will also be excluded.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Inclusion only applies to course heads, not course
s. This means that in the above example the tenors could be split within the courses, or parts of other tenors together courses could be used (e.g. between M and W). If strict tenors together is a requirement, then calls which could split the tenors must 
also be excluded to ensure that this is the case.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The following editing keys are available:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 +\tab \tab \tab Mark course head mask as positive nature only
\par -\tab \tab \tab Mark course head mask as negative nature only
\par ?\tab \tab \tab Wild card in course head mask 
\par 0-9\tab \tab \tab Fixed bells in course head mask
\par Space\tab \tab Mark course head mask as either nature
\par Left\tab \tab Move cursor left through or between input fields
\par Right\tab \tab Move cursor right through or between input fields
\par Up\tab \tab \tab Move up through the input fields
\par Down\tab \tab Move down through the input fields
\par Tab\tab \tab Move to next field
\par Backtab\tab \tab Move to previous field
\par Home\tab \tab Move to first field
\par End\tab \tab Move to last field
\par Enter\tab \tab Accept and edit field input, move to next input field
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Build Composing Table (F4)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Pressing F4 will build the composing tabl
e for the currently selected method, inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria. On completion, the composing engine (F9) is automatically started and the Composition List (F5) function is invoked to list any compositions found.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
The composing table is designed to minimise the work required by the composing engine to achieve the highest possible composing speed. The table contains a row for every possible lead head plus an additional row for starting rounds, making 5041 rows in to
tal. The table can be viewed using the Display Composing Table function (F8).
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
The table is optimised based on the specified inclusion (Alt F3) and exclusion (F3) criteria to  restrict the number of lead heads down from the 5040 available.   Using the tenor positions where calls are permitted, it works out which leads it is possible
 to get to from rounds and excludes the rest. For example, if singles and all calls which would part the tenors are excluded, 420 leads would be available. The number of leads available for composition is displayed at the top of the screen. 
\par The function transposes the permitted plains, bobs and singles for each lead head and retains the table row number for the destination lead heads against the source lead head in the table. It then works out the table row number for each false lead head an
d stores these, omitting any which are not applicable due to the false leads being excluded. The highest number of false lead heads held for a lead is displayed, together with the maximum number of  false lead heads possible for the method.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
At present, the program does not use extended memory and therefore the composing table size is limited by the conventional memory available under DOS. The table is currently 474K and number of false lead heads which can be stored without increasing its si
ze is 18. If this number is exceeded for any lead, the message "FLH table array overflow. Increase lead/call exclusions" is displayed. To overcome this, the exclusions for calls, lead and course heads must be tightened up and the table
 rebuilt (F4) until 18 or less false lead heads occur. 
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The function also counts and stores in the table the number of selected musical combinations contained in each lead for later analysis of compositions found.
\par The time taken to build the table is proportional to the number of leads included. To build a table for all 5040 lead heads takes less than a minute on a 25Mhz 80486 PC.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Once the table has been compiled, the program can compose without generating any rows from place notation, transposing any le
ad heads, or working out any falseness. Furthermore, musical assessment can be done merely by adding the totals stored for the selected lead heads.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 It should be noted that the current composition list is discarded when the composing table is rebuilt.
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Display Composition List (F5)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 This functions is automatically invoked when composition starts, but can be re invoked at any time by pressing F5. Any new compositions will automatically appear on the list as they are found.

\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Compositions are li
sted in descending order of merit as assessed by the composition score. The score is calculated by SMC when the composition is evaluated. For speed of scoring, the score is a 32-bit number comprising the sum of binary weighting factors applied to musical 
and other criteria. The weighting factors, which are not currently user modifiable, are set as follows:
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
\par \trowd \trgaph108\trleft1167 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cellx3421\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cellx5365\clbrdrt
\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw30 \cellx7129\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\b Measure\cell }\pard \s5\qc\intbl {\b Weight (back)\cell }\pard \s5\qc\intbl {\b Weight (front)\cell }\pard\plain 
\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \trowd \trgaph108\trleft1167 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cellx3421\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 
\cellx5365\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw30 \cellx7129\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 not \ldblquote longest yet\rdblquote  \cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl 2{\fs16\up6 31}\cell \pard 
\s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 Longer compositions\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl length \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 0} \cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row 
\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 Shorter compositions\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl 40320-length \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 1}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 
87s at backstroke\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl 720-count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 17}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 82s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl 720-count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 12}\cell 
\pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 83s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl 720-count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 11}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row 
\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 Number of parts\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 17}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl N/A\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 5678 combinations\cell 
\pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 5}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 5}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 combination roll-ups\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 17
}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 16}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 5678s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 17}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 16}
\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 6578s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 16}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 15}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row 
\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 4578s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 14}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 12}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 4678s\cell 
\pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 14}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 12}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 6478s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 13}\cell \pard 
\s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 11}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 5478s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 13}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 11}\cell \pard\plain 
\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 3578s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 14}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 12}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl 
\f3\fs22\lang2057 3478s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 14}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 12}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 8765s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count 
\'d7 2{\fs16\up6 15}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 13}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 7568s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 15}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2
{\fs16\up6 13}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 7658s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 15}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 13}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 7468s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 10}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 7}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 2468s
\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 10}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 7}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 1234s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 10}\cell 
\pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 7}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \trowd \trgaph108\trleft1167 \clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cellx3421\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl
\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw15 \cellx5365\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw15 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw30 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw30 \cellx7129\pard\plain \s5\qc\intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 4321s\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count 
\'d7 2{\fs16\up6 10}\cell \pard \s5\qc\intbl count \'d7 2{\fs16\up6 7}\cell \pard\plain \intbl \f3\fs22\lang2057 \row \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
\par The function displays a list of summary information for each composition found, namely:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 No\tab \tab Number of the composition in the list
\par Elapsed\tab Elapsed time taken to find the composition
\par Lnth\tab Length of the composition
\par Prt\tab \tab Count of equal parts
\par Ps\tab \tab Count of plains
\par Bs\tab \tab Count of bobs
\par Ss\tab \tab Count of singles
\par 87s\tab Count of 87s at backstroke
\par 82s\tab Count of 82s
\par 83s\tab Count of 83s
\par crus\tab Count of combination roll ups (back/front)
\par xxxxs\tab Count of xxxxs (back/front) where xxxx is a four bell mask
\par 5678cmb\tab Count of 5678 combinations (back/front)
\par R\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12345678 (Rounds)
\par Q\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 13572468 (Queens)
\par W\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12753468 (Whittingtons)
\par T\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 15263748 (Tittums)
\par B\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 87654321 (Back Rounds)
\par H\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12563478 (Hagdyke)
\par R\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 14327658 (Rollercoaster)
\par 6\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 65432178
\par 7\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 76543218
\par Compscore\tab The calculated score for the composition 
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
64K of memory is reserved for this list and the compositions are held in compressed format. Approximately 500 normal peal length compositions can be held. When the list is full, compositions with the lowest composition score are dropped from the table to
 allow better compositions to be added. A count of all compositions meeting the selection criteria and the number currently listed is constantly displayed. 
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Compositions can be manually removed from the list by pressing the delete key when the composition is highlighted.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The following keys can be used in this function:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Left\tab \tab Page Left
\par Right\tab \tab Page Right
\par Up\tab \tab \tab Move up one line
\par Down\tab \tab Move down one line
\par Page Down   \tab Page Down
\par Page Up\tab \tab Page Up
\par Home\tab \tab Top of list
\par End\tab \tab Bottom of list
\par Enter/Space \tab Display composition (see below)
\par Delete\tab \tab Delete composition from list
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Display Composition from List (Enter)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
Pressing Enter or the space bar while the composition list is displayed (F5) will display the highlighted composition, in standard notation. Note certain assumptions have been made to make the formatting of compositions logically consistent for all lead o
rders. The main ones are:
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 1)\tab The calling positions are presented in columns according to place bell order of the tenor in the plain course.
\par 2)\tab Calls are shown on the same line regardless of  intervening course heads, provided that the call is in the same column or a later column from the previous call.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 3)\tab 
When a new line is required (i.e. when a call is required in an earlier column than the previous call) and there is no intervening course head, the lead head of the previous call is displayed in parentheses in its place.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 4)\tab If the composition is an exact multipart, a line is drawn after each part.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 5)\tab If the composition overflows the screen, dots are shown on the first and line to indicate where the composition has scrolled off screen.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The following keys can be used in this function:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Left\tab \tab Page Left through list summary
\par Right\tab \tab Page Right through list summary
\par Down\tab \tab Move down the composition one line
\par Up\tab \tab \tab Move up the composition one line
\par Page Down   \tab Display the next composition in the list
\par Page Up\tab \tab Display the previous composition in the list
\par Enter/Space  \tab Return to Composition List
\par Delete\tab \tab Delete composition from list
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Display Composition in Progress (F6)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
Pressing F6 invokes the dynamic display function for the current composition. It displays the composition currently being developed, in standard notation, allowing the progress of the composing engine to be monitored visually. Snapshots of the composition
 are displayed whenever the composing engine releases control. This is either when a composition has been found or after every 10,000 leads generated. This gives sub-second refresh of the screen.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 This function reduces composing speed by approximately 5%. Cursor and paging keys are not  available.
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Display Music Analysis (F7)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Not yet implemented. A music summary is shown in the composition list (F5).
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Display Composing Table (F8)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
Pressing F8 displays the composing table. A row exists on this table for each of the 5040 lead heads plus an additional row for rounds (start and finish). Excluded rows are not displayed. The lead heads for calls and false leads are actually held in the t
able as row numbers but are displayed as lead heads.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Viewing the table is a useful way of checking that the inclusions and exclusions have had the effect you intended.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 Column headings are displayed as follows:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 LHNo\tab Lead head number (i.e. the row number in the composing table)
\par Leadhead\tab The lead head suffixed by its nature
\par Len\tab The lead length - constant, except where the lead contains rounds
\par Pt\tab \tab The number of parts in the composition, if this lead head is a part head
\par Plain\tab The next lead head if no call, blank if the call/lead is excluded 
\par Bob\tab The next lead head if bobbed, blank if the call/lead is excluded
\par Single\tab The next lead head if singled, blank if the call/lead is excluded
\par R\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12345678 (Rounds)
\par Q\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 13572468 (Queens)
\par W\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12753468 (Whittingtons)
\par T\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 15263748 (Tittums)
\par B\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 87654321 (Back Rounds)
\par H\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 12563478 (Hagdyke)
\par R\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 14327658 (Rollercoaster)
\par 6\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 65432178
\par 7\tab \tab If "Y", the lead contains 76543218
\par I\tab \tab If "Y", the lead has been included in the developing composition
\par C\tab \tab The call in the developing composition (P, B or S)
\par 87s\tab The number of 87s at backstroke in the lead
\par 82s/83s\tab The number of 82s & 83s in the lead
\par crus\tab The number of crus in the lead (front & back)
\par (5678)s\tab The number of combinations of 5678 in the lead (front & back)
\par xxxxs\tab The number of xxxx's in the lead (front & back)
\par flh\tab \tab The number of false leads which must be checked to ensure truth
\par flh nn\tab The false lead heads to this lead (NB, the maximum stored is currently 18) 
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 The table can be navigated using the following keys:
\par \pard\plain \s5\qj\li1134 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Down/Page Down\tab Page Down
\par Up/Page Up\tab Page Up
\par Home\tab \tab Top of table
\par End\tab \tab Bottom of table
\par Left\tab \tab Page Left
\par Right\tab \tab Page Right
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Suspend/Restart Composition (F9)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 The composing engine is automatically started after the Build Table function (F4). However it can be suspended by pressing F9 and restarted by pressing F9 again.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 
The composing engine runs as a pseudo-background process so that all other functions remain available while composition progresses. To maximise efficiency the composing engine only checks for keyboard input after every 10,000 leads. This may result in a n
oticeable slowing of response to other functions if a low lead generation rate (< 30K/sec) is being achieved. If this is a problem, press F9 to suspend composition while other functions are used.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The elapsed time from building the composing ta
ble, the number of leads checked (in millions), the number of leads checked per second (in thousands) and a percentage complete figure is displayed. These are updated whenever there is any new information to display or a key is pressed. The number of lead
s per second is simply the number of leads checked divided by the elapsed time and the percentage complete is a crude measure of the search progress based on the bland assumption that all branches of the search tree are the same length (which of course th
ey are not). 
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The composing engine is a small routine, with optimised code to maximise composing speed. It checks the following to ensure truth and restrict the size of the search, namely:
\par \pard\plain \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab the lead  is not already in the composition
\par {\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab any referenced false lead heads are not in the composition
\par {\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab the maximum  composition length has not been exceeded
\par \pard \s3\qj\fi-306\li1440\sa120 {\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab the maximum number of  calls (for particular calling positions) have not been exceeded
\par \pard \s3\qj\fi-306\li1440\sa120 {\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab the maximum part size has not been exceeded (only applies if one parts are excluded and regenerative optimisation is in effect)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 
It then repeats this process until a lead containing rounds is found (these are flagged in the table). If the minimum composition length has been reached it then submits the composition for evaluation.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 The evaluation routine checks that all minimum exclusion criteria (e.g. for musical r
ows) have been satisfied. If specified, it then rotates the composition by course heads and evaluates the rotations. Any non-duplicate compositions satisfying the selection criteria are added to the composition list with summary information. 
\par \pard\plain \s253\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Quit (F10)
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 Pressing F10 exits SMC. 
\par \pard\plain \s254\fi-1138\li1138\sb240\sa120\keepn \b\f3\fs28\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst autonumlgl }{\fldrslt }}\tab Feedback\~\~
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 SMC was developed in 1992/93 and although still in the development stage, it has had little modification since then. However, I do intend at some point to redevelop it for Windows and exte
nded memory. At the same time I would like to make more features user configurable.
\par The current version is being made available to demonstrate its capabilities and to elicit useful feedback for future versions. Please note that I cannot {\i guarantee}
 the reliability of the software and therefore assumptions should not be made that SMC has found all the compositions for a given set of criteria, or even that the compositions displayed are true.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 For the purposes of demonstration, the standard eight Surprise Majo
r methods are built into to SMC. If you need a composition for a method not currently included in SMC, please contact me via the Ringers BBS or via the internet and I will see if I can help.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 All rights to the software are reserved by the author, and it must not be modified in any way, or distributed for sale or gain without express permission.
\par \pard \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 I would appreciate feedback on SMC. In particular, if you have ideas on the following:
\par \pard\plain \s3\qj\li1134\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab further ways to optimise the search algorithm
\par {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab a better way of estimating search time and completeness of search
\par {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab improvements to composition scoring
\par {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst symbol 183 \\f "Symbol" \\s 8 \\h}{\fldrslt }}\tab new areas of functionality
\par \pard\plain \s255\qj\li1134\sb120\sa120 \f3\fs22\lang2057 I can be contacted via the Ringers BBS or the internet (johng@lfgms.logica.com).
\par }